#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass book
\begin_preamble
%\usepackage[helvetica]{quotchap}
%%\usepackage[lmodern]{quotchap}

%%%%
%\usepackage{graphicx}
%\usepackage{subfigure}
%%\usepackage{caption}

%\usepackage{subcaption}

\usepackage{fancyhdr}
\fancyhf{}
\cfoot{\thepage}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
theorems-ams-bytype
theorems-ams-extended-bytype
theorems-chap-bytype
customHeadersFooters
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language british
\language_package auto
\inputencoding auto-legacy
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command bibtex
\index_command default
\float_placement tph
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing onehalf
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks false
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize a4
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 4cm
\topmargin 3cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style british
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle fancy
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Left Header
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Background
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With the modern robotic fleets deployed in search and rescue (SAR) missions,
 the decision-making and path-planning coordination do not realistically represent the ground truth of open-world environments.
 Current fleets and their respective coordination strategies fail to account for the diverse,
 dynamic and unpredictable terrains that need to be navigated,
 such as those encountered during natural disasters:
 flooding,
 torrential rain,
 or urban-forest interfaces.
 To traverse these complex environments,
 heterogeneous robots have been developed with a wide array of differing locomotion methods.
 The primary methods of locomotion include Legged,
 Aerial,
 Nautical,
 Driven,
 and Surface robots.
 However,
 no single locomotion mode can navigate every condition with equal safety and efficiency.
 Robotic engineers would need to employ a fleet that incorporates all types of robotic locomotion to surpass these limitations,
 and future SAR fleet mission planners should be able to coordinate and deploy a locomotion-diverse heterogeneous fleet under a unified framework.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A heterogeneous fleet can pair legged robots that climb debris with aerial drones that provide rapid situational awareness,
 nautical vehicles that operate in flooded streets,
 driven platforms that cover broad flat regions quickly and surface skimming robots that traverse unstable ground or bodies of water without sinking.
 Each type of robot should be able to inspect the mission site and perform actions in the environment,
 such as delivering a care package or providing immediate aid to individuals in need,
 where its particular mobility yields the lowest risk of damage or delay.
 In the works of Daniel H.
 Stolfi et al.
 [1],
 they showed the benefit of a multi-locomotion robotic fleet for surveillance,
 engaging with three robots of differing locomotion types to achieve a detection rate of human escapees of 89%.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Despite the potential of such diverse fleets,
 the literature does not adequately address scenarios requiring the coordinated deployment of all four locomotion types.
 Hence,
 each agent's traversability capability and assessments of risks when navigating terrain should be confronted.
 This research seeks to bridge these gaps by investigating a novel framework for coordinating heterogeneous robotic fleets to ensure operational efficacy in realistic,
 open-world environments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This work will investigate the utilisation of a centralised mission planning algorithm derived from a traversability risk assessment framework.
 The framework is a probabilistic risk model estimating the sum of all traversability risks in a robotic agent's environment that would damage the robot or impede the mission.
 These traversability risks could be physical obstructions in the environment that would interrupt a robot's path or an efficiency risk such as an intense path-way that would drain the robot's battery life at a rate which would not be sustainable for the whole mission.
 The algorithm will coordinate a heterogeneous multi-robotic fleet deployment containing differing locomotion types.
 Therefore,
 a lower traversability risk would mean a more suitable terrain for a specified locomotion type.
 The fleet coordination and agent distribution will be based on appropriate terrain for each locomotion type,
 encouraging faster search times for survivors whilst being capable of rearranging robots that can provide immediate relief while considering power management for navigation.
 Ensuring post-calamity environments are traversable and physical aid can be distributed to survivors promptly to prolong their chances of survival.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There has been extensive research on cooperative robotics in SAR operations,
 where a heterogeneous group of robots (mainly a pair of two differing locomotion types) would collaboratively search environments together to reach survivors of disasters.
 For example,
 ground robots being supported by multiple drones [2,3,4] or even deploying their own drones [5].
 Additionally,
 the survey by Ziye Zhou et al.
 highlights the growing trend of multi-domain cooperation,
 where underwater robots collaborate with aerial and surface vehicles to overcome limitations in underwater communication and navigation.
 This integration enhances mission efficiency by enabling tasks like data relay,
 precise positioning,
 and broad-area monitoring across different operational domains [6].
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These robotic fleet applications demonstrate how a heterogeneous multi-robotic system offering different locomotion utilities is more optimised for realistic open-world environments,
 Thus expanding the scope and quality of tasks SAR robotic systems could execute.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Motivation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Deploying a heterogeneous fleet of robots into a complex disaster zone,
 each equipped with their own distinct locomotion capabilities,
 attempts to achieve a singular overarching purpose:
 to ensure that every point in the environment can be reached by at least one agent,
 thereby maximising the probability of locating survivors and providing immediate relief.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset VSpace bigskip
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Image
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Despite increasing interest in multi-robot systems for search and rescue (SAR),
 the volume of research exploring the coordination of fleets incorporating all four primary types of autonomous unmanned vehicles:
 ground (UGV),
 aerial (UAV),
 surface (USV),
 and underwater (UUV) remains extremely limited.
 To the best of our knowledge,
 this is the first study to examine the control and cooperation of such a heterogeneous team within a unified framework.
 The lack of existing research stems from several fundamental challenges:
 the computational complexity of synchronising diverse platforms,
 the harsh and varied operational environments they encounter,
 and the exponential rise in system faults as more agents are introduced [7].
 Experimental work to date has focused mainly on communication bottlenecks,
 bandwidth constraints,
 and individual integration strategies such as path planning and mapping,
 often in simulation or limited domain settings.
 Recent literature,
 such as the work of Peña Queralta et al.
 [8],
 emphasises the need to bridge control and perception across domains and highlights emerging trends toward autonomous heterogeneous teams with active perception.
 Assuming these systemic and technological constraints can be mitigated,
 critical research directions open up,
 including questions of shared autonomy,
 dynamic situational awareness,
 and true interoperability across all locomotion types.
 This study directly addresses the following core gaps:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Shared autonomy:
 enabling efficient human-swarm interaction with minimal operator burden.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Operational environments:
 tackling the real-world challenges of search and rescue in tough places such as collapsed buildings,
 marine zones,
 or subterranean areas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Interoperability and situational awareness:
 making sure different types of robots can work together smoothly and adapt in real-time,
 no matter the environment,
 across land,
 air,
 sea,
 and sub-sea domains.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The potential of the systems is heightened when united under one framework,
 allowing for accurate,
 standardised comparisons of probability and bids in market-based decision-making.
 Standardisation will allow for fair bidding in task allocation as all robots will have a consistent evaluation metric,
 giving the fleet more scalability and flexibility.
 Additionally,
 one unified framework will allow future work to consider decentralised coordination methods.
 By mitigating the constrained locomotions of the system,
 the robot fleet will be able to distribute perception data to robots that could not previously access terrain information outside of their peripheral sensor vision;
 for example,
 a UGV being unable to scan and map sharp cliffs in its vicinity seen in [9],
 the use of one or multiple UAVs would be able to monitor the drop-off with minimal risk and be able to merge maps with the UGV to fill in the gaps.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Furthermore,
 utilising a heterogeneous fleet that can interact with and traverse all environments will increase the chance of finding the targets in real-world applications as more of the environment becomes accessible.
 The significant map updates and replanning potential also mean that the fleet can reorganise itself to evaluate the terrain information and navigate key agents that can provide triage and medical aid.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Aims & Objectives
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This research aims to develop a traversability risk assessment framework that can be incorporated into the decision-making algorithms of heterogeneous robotic fleets during search and rescue missions.
 By analysing terrain traversability across four locomotion types,
 this framework will enhance the effectiveness of heterogeneous robotic fleets in disaster scenarios,
 enabling coordinated efforts to reduce search times and deliver critical aid in complex,
 dynamic environments with realistic obstacles.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Develop a traversability risk assessment framework that is able to represent physical terrain obstructions that would impede a robot fleet as a summed probabilistic traversability risk.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Extend the framework to include aquatic and aerial traversability risks to enable a heterogeneous fleet mission of different locomotion types.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Consider non-physical environmental factors such as temperature,
 humidity and radiation in the probabilistic risk model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Produce a centralised mission planning algorithm to coordinate the fleet and compare it to a decentralised system.
 Introduce more robotic agents of differing locomotion types and consider how the system will handle and distribute them efficiently based on suitable terrain for each locomotion type.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Simulate the framework in urban,
 rural,
 and hybrid disaster scenarios,
 portraying that the algorithm works for a heterogeneous fleet of robots with all locomotion types and can provide immediate relief to survivors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Demonstrate that the framework works for a heterogeneous robotic fleet in urban-rural hybrid scenarios with one combination of locomotion types.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Organisation of Report
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The rest of the report is organised and structured as follows:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description

\series bold
Chapter 2
\series default
 presents a comprehensive literature review that underpins the development of the proposed framework.
 It begins by contextualising the current state of multi-robot disaster robotics and highlights the capabilities and limitations of existing heterogeneous SAR systems.
 The discussion then moves into risk assessment methodologies,
 detailing both traversability-based and efficiency-based risks and how these are quantified using frameworks such as Lambda fields.
 Subsequent sections cover localisation and 3D map integration,
 where octree-based and point-cloud approaches are compared for their suitability in real-time fleet coordination.
 The chapter continues with an analysis of risk-aware path planning,
 addressing both physical and energy-based constraints,
 before evaluating communication protocols and coordination models for scalable,
 resilient fleet behaviour in dynamic environments.
 Finally,
 the review explores task allocation strategies,
 particularly those that integrate spatial risk models for intelligent decision-making,
 and evaluates robotic simulation platforms for prototyping and validating heterogeneous fleet deployments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter 
\series bold
3
\series default
 formalises the research problem and defines the assumptions made and the conditions of success from both a mathematical and practical perspective.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter 
\series bold
4 
\series default
documents the technical advances achieved during the first year and positions them against the aims set out in Section 1.3.
 It opens with the mathematical preliminaries underlying the proposed 
\begin_inset Formula $λ$
\end_inset

-field formulation,
 detailing the practical realisation within an OctoMap-based mapping pipeline,
 including the extension from 2-D to weighted 3-D voxel chunks.
 Subsequent subsections summarise the preliminary treatment of environmental hazard layers,
 the integration of efficiency-based risk terms,
 and the initial map-fusion experiments.
 The chapter concludes with a concise statement of contributions to date and highlights the principal shortcomings and open issues that motivate the work planned for Years 2 and 3.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter 
\series bold
5 
\series default
Concludes the report and presents a detailed project plan for the remaining three years of the research project,
 including potential publications and deliverables.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
